---
title: A Few Notes About DJing Swing Dances
author: Ricky Elrod
date: Wed, 05 Jul 2017 05:24:44 -0400
tags: swing, swing dancing, music, djing
---

I started swing dancing back in March of 2015, and for reasons I won't get into
here, let's just say I am *very* glad that I did. It has changed my life. But
that's not the point of this post.

About a year or so after I got into the various scenes (Youngstown and
Pittsburgh), I started to DJ at various venues. I took some workshops (namely by
Dan Repsch), and got mentored by Pittsburgh dancer and DJ Jared Clemens. I
started with DJing at [Hot Metal Blues](https://hotmetalblues.com/) in
Pittsburgh on Tuesdays, then progressed to DJ band breaks at Pittsburgh's
[Swing City](https://www.swingpgh.com/) and my home scene, Cedars. I've been
DJing these three venues ever since, and learned a fair bit along the way. I
wanted to share some of that.

Obviously each DJ has, and should have, their own style of DJing. Like
everything in swing (the music, the dancing, etc.), there is pleny of room for
improvisation --- making up the set, and the rules, as you go. So, nothing I say
here is found in any rule book. It's simply a few guidelines that I have found
helped my DJing a lot. This post will contain some stories mixed in with a bunch
of rambling. Hang on tight.

**These are not in any particular order.**

I'll break this down into a few headings...

## Setting the Mood

Under normal circumstances, as a DJ, we must decide what kind of mood we want in
the room, and devise a path to obtain that mood. Swing music makes a big deal
about energy. When I am the only DJ for a night, I *typically* start with a
fairly high energy song. If the crowd responds well, I keep this going for a
while. As the set goes on, I will transition to lower-energy songs and
back. There is a point where the energy level can be made *too* low, so it's
worth always having a song ready to get people swingin' out again.

Transition songs can be useful, but **are not a magic bullet** and are not
necessary. One thing I've been told in various workshops is to transition songs
by finding one or two things that change between them each song. In other words,
if I play two songs that have a female singer and are in the 140bpm range, then
maybe I'll keep the tempo roughly the same, and find a song that has a male
singer. A lot of the time, this leads to a decently fluid set with good
transitions. However, if I play a song that ends up doing less well than I
thought (I'll touch later on what this means), then I will forego thinking about
transitions and play a floor-filler (this too) to get the crowd back out on the
floor.

## React (and Be Prepared To Do So)

As a DJ, it is part of your job to set the overall mood on the dance floor. But
sometimes, there is a reason to set that aside. Sometimes, something else will
set the mood, and as a DJ it becomes your job to use that energy to react.

One of the first times I DJed at Hot Metal Blues, there was a local sports game
on the screens above the bar in the venue. At the last second, the local team
won the sports game, and the entire floor went *wild*. Everybody in the bar was
yelling with excitement. As a DJ, I quickly went through my library and felt a
feeling of sheer dismay because I couldn't find anything that fit the situation
well. I ended up just continuing on with my blues set as planned, and was really
upset with myself.

Lesson: **Have songs for, and be prepared to react to, any event.**

## Knowing Your Library and Your Crowd (when you can)

Knowing your library is easy. Listen to it in your spare time. Put it on as
background music very often. It's good music anyway, right? Listening to it
shouldn't be a chore.

Knowing your crowd is less easy. If you're a regular DJ for a venue, then you're
able to develop a sense about what kind of music works for a crowd. You can even
take this to the extreme and tag specific songs in your library as being
"floor-fillers for this venue", or as "songs that work for this venue but likely
won't work anywhere else." These tags (not by these names) are both tags that I
have in my DJ library.

I have less experience with DJing for a crowd of random people that I have never
seen before and have never gone to their weekly dances before. I would suggest
talking to the organizers of the scene and seeing the kinds of trends they have
seen based on other DJs at the venue, and just being prepared for any scenario.

## Requests

Requests can be a weird thing. One thing I have found is that if you take a
request for a song, it will be requested again in future DJing sessions, and you
might be forced to play the song often or risk the awkwardness of explaining why
you were willing to play it once but not again.

I've found a few categories that requests fall in:

- **Scene-specific songs** --- Remember how I mentioned above that I have tags
  for music that works well for certain venues? These songs are some of the most
  highly-requested songs that I see when I DJ. One venue I that DJ at, for
  example, has a fair number of people who like to blues-fusion dance to a
  particular version of the folk song "I See Fire." I have this tagged as a
  venue-specific song, because I would likely never play this song at another
  venue. These songs tend to be popular at venues, but also over-played at those
  venues. People who like them, *really* like them, and people who hate how
  over-played they are will tend to get frustrated and sit out. **Be sure to
  have a good song queued up after a scene-specific song**.
- **In-genre songs** --- These actually tend to be rather rare requests, in my
  experience, but these are requests that actually fit the genre that I am
  playing (usually: swing or blues). These are the requests that I am most
  likely to fill, and fast. Depending on the energy of the song, and a number of
  other factors, I will either transition to the song over the next 2-3 songs,
  or just simply queue it up next.
- **Out-of-genre songs** --- These are, for example, the requests for Latin
  songs at a swing night, or pop songs at a blues night. There is a trap to fall
  into here. If you're a new DJ for a venue and you make a habit of filling
  these requests, you'll get many more of them from the regulars. Be prepared to
  deal with that, because honestly, it can be hard to say no when someone you
  know really well (a regular at the scene) comes up to you and asks you to play
  their favorite out-of-genre song. Generally, due to the nature of the
  *request* (as opposed to the song), I will end up filling these. However, they
  become very low on my priority list. I'll either fill them at the end of my
  set, or as I am about to make a big transition.
  For example, at Cedars, usually at 12:15am or so, it's convention to start
  playing blues music and less swing. So the time between 12:00am until 12:15am
  is usually when I play these more obscure or out-of-genre requests. In this
  case, I usually follow it up with one more swing song, and then go into my
  blues set.

## Know Your Settings

One thing I haven't seen any DJ workshop talk about is adjusting your equipment
settings on the fly. This depends on the venue: Some venues don't give you
access to any equalization/volume controls, and you're forced to set them on
your computer. Other venues give you a 24 channel mixer board with
channel-specific 3-band equalizer settings, and tell you to have at it. Be
prepared for both situations, and know when and where to adjust your settings.

When I'm DJing, if I'm not dancing to the song that is playing (which I'll talk
about later), I am constantly doing these things: watching who is dancing,
watching who is sitting, listening to how loud the song is, listening to if the
song is distorted at all, listening to if I can clearly hear the bassline of the
song or not, **watching the waveform of the song on my screen**. There are some
songs, for example, which suddenly get **REALLY LOUD** after having a long
period of quiet during which you might have cranked up the volume so dancers
could still hear the rhythm. In that case, **be prepared to turn the volume back
down right before the loud part happens**.

<img src="https://images.srv1.elrod.me/mixxx-waveform-demo.png"
     alt="mixxx waveform demo" />

When a jam circle breaks out, I tend to have more fun with the settings: I tend
to push the volume a bit higher and bring up the low end a fair number of
notches to accommodate for the energy in the room, the loudness of the clapping,
and so on. I also turn off my program's "Auto DJ" setting, so that **after a jam
circle, the next song won't play automatically**. I do this to give people a
chance to cheer and clap at the end, for the couple in the middle to show off
their dip stance for a bit, and in general give the room a chance to collect,
before going into the next song. How long I wait before queuing the next song
depends solely on the energy and when it looks like people are ready. Usually
about 10-15 seconds after the previous song (whereas my usual pause between
songs is 1-2 seconds).

**When I want to dance to a song, I will always look at the waveform of the next
song** to see what the transition is like. This gives an indication of whether
or not I need to make any adjustments. Usually I will raise/lower the
gain/volume of the secondary deck in my program (Mixxx) to match the average of
the current song's waveform. When I won't be at the computer for the start of
the next song (because I am dancing or taking a restroom break), this is
particularly important. The other settings (equalization) can be set/faded when
I get back if an adjustment is needed. **But not blasting everyone out and
making dancers not miss the beginning of the song is critical**.

## Know How to Read Your Crowd

Reading the crowd is one of the hardest things about DJing a dance. Like playing
an instrument, it's something you can practice week after week, and still find
yourself needing to improve. **Like playing an instrument, it's perhaps
something that you can never truly master**. But you can try.

One key tip that I have been given is to not only watch how many people are
dancing, but watch *how* they are dancing. Are they doing the kind of dance you
expect them to be doing? Are they dancing *well* to it, or is everyone having a
hard time? **Keeping these questions in mind, if nothing else, gives some
indication about how well you are reading the crowd**.

If there are many people sitting, is it because your set was so good that they
got tired and needed a break? Or is it because they find your song choices to be
not dance-able?

There are times during my set where I will go up to some random people, and say
"be brutally honest, you won't hurt my feelings, I promise: What do you think of
my set tonight?" If I get many of the same reaction, then I will try to adjust
the rest of my set a bit, if needed. **If I get all positive feedback, or a very
mixed set of constructive criticism, I will keep going as planned**. This isn't
to say that mixed criticism is bad, but simply that I am trying to play to the
crowd collectively, and if only one person has that complaint and nobody else,
then there's a chance that I am doing my job.
