---
title: Bodhi2 FAD
date: 2014-06-09
tags: fedora,travel
---

The majority of my time last week was spent at the
[Bodhi2/Taskotron](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/FAD_Bodhi2_Taskotron_2014)
Fedora Activity Day (FAD) where I met up with a small number of the people I
work with within the Fedora community.

## Getting There / Sunday

I took a short nap on Saturday night before having a friend pick me up to take
me to the airport. We had quite a bit of time remaining though, so we hung out
for a while and work on some things up at the ham radio club room.

I got to the airport about 1.5 hours early and got checked in. They were letting
people go through the TSA-Pre line because almost nobody was there since it was
so early in the morning. This meant I got through security very quickly.

The flight and layover was uninteresting.

When I got to DEN, I texted Kevin and he came and picked me up. I had a hard
time finding where to meet him, but it ended up working out.

We checked in at the hotel and went over to Luke's place where we took a look at
the conference room and Luke's apartment and office, then hacked for a bit in
the conference room.

I added a way to disable libravatar because it was doing some DNS queries that
were taking 30 seconds each and timing out when the test suite ran. Most of the
remainder of my hacking was on the UI, and I started on the redesign on Sunday
as well.

## Monday

On Monday, I spent a large amount of time making the dashboard page look
reasonable even if the user has JavaScript disabled. I had an idea to show
a fedmsg newsfeed of Bodhi-related events, and I wanted to do this using the
datagrepper JavaScript widget so that it didn't slow down the page load time by
making HTTP requests server-side.

After a lot of thinking and talking with Ralph, I came up with a solution that
works reasonably well:

This is with JavaScript **enabled**:

<img src="http://i.imgur.com/GXZr9dK.png" alt="JS Enabled" />

And this is with JavaScript **disabled**:

<img src="http://i.imgur.com/fWp17qT.png" alt="JS Disabled" />

I also did a lot of refactoring on the update page (the page which lists details
about an individual update).

<img src="http://i.imgur.com/Dte3z1A.png" alt="update page" />

We then enjoyed a good meal at the [Roo Bar](http://roobardenver.com/).

## Tuesday

On Tuesday, I finished up some work on the update page and moved to the user
profile page. I'm still not 100% happy with how it looks and might work on it
some in the future, but for the most part everyone else seemed content with it.

It will send an ajax request to Datagrepper to display the date of the user's
last Bodhi-related action which triggered a fedmsg message. The page is fully
functional without JavaScript, this is just something extra we show if the user
has it enabled.

The user page shows the user's latest updates and most recent comments/karma
left and received.

We went to [Falling Rock](http://fallingrocktaphouse.com/) for dinner and
drinks.

## Wednesday

On Wednesday, our last FAD day I spent most of my time working on the release
pages (the page that lists all releases that Bodhi knows about, and the page
that shows information about an individual release).

I added a JavaScript dependency (optional - the page still works fine without
JavaScript enabled) on [chart.js](http://chartjs.org/) so that we could show
pretty charts about release statistics on the page.

The original graph I added showed updates submitted to a release per-month. Then
Ralph gave me an idea for a multi-colored graph which showed releases submitted
by type (security, bugfix, enhancement, etc.). It took longer than I will admit
but I finally got fancy multi-colored charts working (for some definition of
working).

<img src="http://i.imgur.com/sXwNfrg.png" alt="pretty graph" />

## Thursday

Thursday, I got breakfast on my own and met up in the afternoon with Ralph and
Luke for lunch at [Gomez burritos](http://www.gomezburritosdenver.com/). Their
Egg, Cheese, Potato burrito is really good.

I took a shuttle to the airport with Ralph.

The rest of the day was spent flying. My first flight back was the most
uncomfortable flight I'd ever been on. I was in the middle seat of a 3-seat row
and couldn't move at all. The person on my left was sleeping and making very
weird noises in his sleep. The person on my right seemed to be reviewing some
kind of academic paper. I was interested in what it was, but I didn't want to
be nosy and ask. The second flight was much better and more "normal."

I got home, checked email and IRC, and went to bed.

## That's a wrap!

Overall, I think the FAD was really productive. The project was in a state where
each person could work on their own part of it. I stuck mostly with the UI side
of things (which kept me from having to deal with Python much :P).

Kevin and Dennis got a [staging Koji](http://koji.stg.fedoraproject.org/)
instance up and running; Ralph worked a lot on the New Update functionality;
Luke seemed to be doing a bit of everything, but I think he spent a lot of time
working on adding test coverage. Mathieu worked a ton on buildroot-override
functionality.
