---
title: My opinion of US University General Education Requirements
author: Ricky Elrod
date: December 31, 2014
tags: education
---

A friend recently my opinion of the General Education Requirements (hereafter,
"GERs") as the are implemented throughout many universities in the United
States. I explained to him that this question was fairly broad and that I would
need some time to think about it and formulate a proper response. This post
serves as that response. For background: I attend Youngstown State University and
am majoring in Computer Science and Mathematics.

First off, I want to take a few moments to talk about university in general. In
particular, I have found that the quality of the departments within a university
(I have transferred twice, so in total have attended three universities so far)
vary. A lot. Most of this post will focus on the school I currently attend:
Youngstown State University, but a lot of what I say will generalize fairly well,
based on the universities I have attended and the assumption that most US
universities have in common what these three have had in common.

It is no secret that I have much to say against the way that computer science is
handled at the undergraduate level within the United States. One day I intend to
write up my thoughts in what will likely be a rather long paper which will
examine the history of computer science education programs within the United
States and try to piece together how we got to where we are today. Suffice it to
say that I have come to realize that United States universities in general do not
properly equip undergraduate students for the "real world." Indeed, there is
nearly no mention of formal correctness, professors lack an understanding of even
the most basic type theories, and some quotes that I have seen certain professors
say (and heard of others saying via friends) have left me with no possible action
other than to drop my jaw in disbelief and stare blankly -- in some cases later
writing long emails in an attempt to get professors to stop spreading such
trivially falsifiable lies.

If you look at the math department, on the other hand, professors are willing and
able to back up what they are saying with formal proofs. I have asked several
professors to do this for certain theorems I found interesting, and each of them
was able to do so without question. Mathematics is grounded in proofs, so this is
perhaps uninteresting -- professors of a field grounded in proofs should likely
be able to regurgitate those proofs fairly easily. Nevertheless, I find the
disconnect fairly concerning. This isn't to say that I am biased toward the math
department. If it were that, I would drop the Computer Science major and focus
solely on the Mathematics major. It is just that I want to understand where the
disconnect of quality comes from and how it can be restored. I want Computer
Science, as an undergraduate degree program in the United States, to be a useful
thing. I want it to *really* prepare students for the real world, not watch as
state-funded universities turn into what might as well be trade-schools by
cuddling up with businesses like the Youngstown Business Incubator and
encouraging students to partake in a start-up which will
[statistically fail](http://www.wamda.com/2013/02/90-percent-of-tech-startups-fail-infographic)
not long after starting.

So what does this have to do with GERs?

First off, what is a GER? Most universities require that incoming freshmen must
take a series of courses from various departments, as part of their degree
program. These courses and departments vary from university to university, but
often include things like Writing/Composition, Communication, Arts and
Humanities, Politics, Natural Sciences, Economics, History, Ethics, and some
others. There is a predetermined number of credit-hours that each student must
take from each department.

What is the point of them? Well, I argue that there are two main features of
GERs:

- First, GERs provide a way for students to pick up some new interests. For
  example, students might discover that they find biology or physics more
  interesting than they originally thought they would.
- Secondly, GERs provide a way out of the above pre-selected fate for students
  who are in mostly-theoretical fields.

Let me break these down a bit.

GERs give students a view of what all is out there beyond the fields they are
majoring in. This is important because students can pick up new (perhaps side)
interests that they had no idea about previously. This can also work in the other
direction though, unfortunately. For a while, I wanted to take a political
science course because I wanted to become more informed politically. I expressed
this interest to some friends for a while before transferring to Youngstown State
University, but after transferring, it turned out that I was able to take an
introductory Political Science course as a GER. Unfortunately, my teacher carried
himself very unprofessionally, swearing often, not making himself clear, and
generally making the class fairly uninteresting. But I could have lived with all
of that. It wasn't until I had to leave early one day because something came up,
when I stood up and walked out of the class a few minutes early only to be cussed
out by the professor in front of the entire class, that I decided I would never
take another political science course at a university again. That said, I plan on
buying some books and reading up on it more myself. Teachers can ward students
from ever wanting to take another class in their field, very easily. But I think
they can also almost-always have the opposite effect, if they carry themselves
appropriately and put some effort into making the class into something
memorable and enjoyable.

The other point is that GERs open up places for students to *apply* knowledge
obtained in their field of study. I am dual-majoring in Computer Science and
Mathematics. Let's take Computer Science: You learn algorithms and data
structures and other theoretical aspects, but then when it comes time to apply
them you are pretty much told to go talk to the Youngstown Business Incubator and
get a job at a start-up writing NodeJS or Ruby code for some startup until it
fails. Then what? Whereas after taking GERs, students might have some idea how to
apply their field of study to other domains. For example, what happens when you
take biology (a Natural Science GER) and apply it to computer science? You get
the field of bioinformatics or computational biology. What happens when you take
language courses (broadly, linguistics) and apply it to computer science? You get
the field of computational linguistics. And so on.

In that way, GERs give students an opportunity to *use* their field of study in
ways beyond the start-up culture that so many of them are being pushed toward.

So -- what do I think of GERs? Well, I think that until individual fields of
study are better off in universities (until the Computer Science curriculum is
fixed and professors stop saying spreading so much trivially false information,
for example), I wouldn't change the GERs because I feel they fill a necessary
gap. I think that once the more fundamental issues are fixed, we can revisit the
issues of GERs, but until then, I wouldn't advocate for changing them.
