---
title: A GitHub year in review
author: Rick Elrod
date: Sat, 07 Feb 2015 10:37:46 -0500
tags: foss, fedora
---

About 11.5 months ago from today, I realized that I had a GitHub streak of about
25 days. Some of these daily contributions were small: 1 commit here, 3 pushes
there, a pull request over there, an issue reported over in some other
repository.

However, it got me thinking (and at the same time, I saw that
[Ralph Bean](https://github.com/ralphbean/) had a similarly long streak going,
so I was encouraged). I decided that I would try to continue the streak. I
didn't (and still don't) want to take it seriously to the point where breaking
the streak would be a huge deal, but at the same time, seeing a new box light up
with a new day's contribution is a pretty nice feeling. That is, if some
emergency came up, and I couldn't commit for a day, it wouldn't be the end of
the world for me.

Since I already had almost 30 days, however, it didn't seem like too big of a
deal to get 60 days. So I tried. And once I had 60, getting to 100 seemed not
too bad. So I tried that. Well, here we are a some months later, and I'm at 365
days. One year of at least one Free and Open Source contribution (either issue
filed, code committed, or some combination of both), every single day. It's a
pretty neat feeling. :)

Of course this doesn't account for the off-GitHub things I do: Helping out at
conferences, helping people out on IRC, sysadmin work I do in Fedora
Infrastructure and Haskell Infrastructure, and so on.

If you step through my contribution heatmap and look for patterns, you'll find
what I already knew about how I work: I can't work on one project for a very
long time. I simply get bored with it and have to move on for a while. Then I
come back to it.

So you'll many patterns where I'll work on some project for days at a time, then
move on to some new project and not touch the old one for quite a while. This is
how I work, I've always been this way.

Another thing you'll see, related to the above, is that I simply work on a *lot*
of projects. I do this because I like having a lot of projects that I can move
around between. Sometimes I'll come across some problem in one of them, and have
no idea how to move past it. After thinking for some time, if I'm not making any
progress, I'll set the project aside and start working on one of my other
projects. Then, down the road, I'll revisit the first project and usually be
able to think of a way to move past the problem.

The moral is: I was able to build up this streak because I have a lot of
projects to work on.

Occasionally a peer will come up to me in the Computer Science department at YSU
and ask me how I manage to do so much. My answer is usually twofold: The first I
already said -- have a lot of projects. The second is that I **enjoy** working
on them. While some people enjoy playing video games or watching TV in their
free time, I enjoy writing code (or reading technical books and papers). If you
truly enjoy doing something, it's really not too hard to do it every day.

I'm not sure how long my streak will last. My unofficial goal so far has been a
year, which is today. But I never took it too seriously and I will continue to
not take it too seriously... So I'm not sure when it will end. We'll see!

If there's something to take away, it's this: Do what you enjoy that makes you
productive. Do it every day. Set your *own* streak goals if you have to. And try
to build a community around it. It's sometimes much easier to work on a project
when other people are also interested in it (or better, when those people also
contribute to it). You have people to bounce ideas off of. People who know the
internals of the project as well as you do, who can tell you when you're about
to mess it all up. And people who are hopefully willing to tell you when you're
wrong. Because that's important: Being wrong is a chance for learning. Heed it.
